From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes, a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lauren's Ryan
announcing show number one 39.
Recorded live Monday, November 24th, 2008. Support
for Hanselman it's just provided
by Tellerik rad controls. The
most comprehensive suite of components
for windows forms and asp.net
web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. Support is
also provided by.net developers journal
the world's leading.net developer magazine
online at www dot
dot com. In this episode,
Scott talks with Miguel de
Caza and Joseph Hill. The folks
behind Moonlight. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman and this is
another episode of Hansel minutes
this week. We're talking to
Joseph Hill and Miguel de Caza
from Novell from the mano
project. Thanks guys for taking
the time to talk to
me today. Thanks. Thanks for
having us. How am I
go? You're on vacation. So
you're calling in from Mexico,
right? Yes. That is correct.
Are you like in a,
in a you're in your
hotel or? No, I'm staying
at the, at a friend's
at a friend's place. So,
you know, it's nice to
have friends that can cost
you when it comes here.
Yeah, that's great. Well, thanks.
I didn't realize that you
were on vacation. I appreciate
you taking time out of
your, out of your day.
So we've got some Moonlight
announcements here. Yes, that's right.
We're finally, you know, we've
been working one light for
a little bit more than
a year now in the,
in the first version of,
of Moonlight. And as you
probably know, it's, it's, it's,
it's an implementation. Silverlight 1.0
right now. And we're about
to, we're about to launch
it. Initially we started this
project because we're really excited,
not by , but by
Silverlake one, one, which was
announced in mixing Oh seven,
I think. And so we
got really interested about the
Silverlight one, one, but as
it turns out in a
lot of the technology that
you need, it was, you
know, the foundation of existence
of a low 1.0. So
we've been working towards that
goal first sheet, that version.
And, and what was interesting
is that when we started,
when we started the project,
we showed this to a
few guys with Microsoft and,
and we thought that it
would be interesting. We thought
that it would be interesting
for Linux world that to
have an open source implementation
of silver lights, something that
would fit more naturally with,
with what the community does
there. So, so Microsoft actually
offered, offered of help. And
so they gave us access
to their test suites for
silver lights, 1.0 and now
for 2.0, and they also
gave us, you know, one
of the, kind of, one
of the more, most complicated
problems with silver, like really
was the, the media pipeline,
you know, the media codex,
because you know, many companies
own, you know, many companies
own patents and they actively
licensed those media patterns for,
you know, MP3 of VC
one and WMC and all
of that stuff. So for
us to have a successful
implementation of Silverlight for Linux,
one of the kind of
sticky points was how do
we get, how do we
get the media to Linux
users in a fully legit
way? So you're now fully
licensed version of the codex.
So Microsoft actually stepped up
and, and, and they are
actually providing the codex is
not novel that provides a
codex. That is the one
piece that, that is the
one kind of a piece
that is not open source,
the actual video codecs and
audio codecs. So the way
it's gonna work is when
you, when you install server,
let them, your system through,
you know, through, through a
plugin for Firefox, the first
time that you, that you
tried to play any media,
any MP3s or any videos,
it will, it will ask
you whether you want to
download the codex from Microsoft.
I will go and fetch
the codex from Microsoft, and
he still goes on your
system. And, and then that
way we ensure that every
year that every user of
Silverlight and Linux will have
a fully licensed media stack
in addition to the Moonlight
engine then. So, you know,
so it's, it's been quite
interesting working on this because,
you know, I, we started
just with the, with the
sample codes and when Microsoft
came in and gave the
test suites, we finally have
something, you know, very comprehensive
to aim for. And, you
know, we've worked for the
past nine months and making
sure that, that our Silverlight
one point, is there a
path every one of the
Microsoft test suites, the only
thing that is the only
test that we can have
not run perfectly are the
ones that are related to
fonts, because the default set
of funds that come with
Linux are different than the
defaults that are fonts that
you can have windows. But
other than that, we're, you
know, we're fully compatible at
this point. I fully compatible
as you can, you know,
as you can, as you
can, as you can do
it with, with, with functional
tests, That's pretty slick. Now,
why, why do you prompt
them? Why do you have
to pull the codex down
later? I'm curious. Well, because,
so, so it has to
do with the way that
these products are licensed. Microsoft
is already a license or
an already, you know, well,
I guess, I guess we
could download it immediately, as
soon as you installed one
day as your question, I
guess we could do that.
Well, I guess, I mean,
I don't quite understand software
licensing and that complicated, but
I suppose that if there
are, if there a set
of people who are using
it, but are not using
it for media, then I
guess someone doesn't have to
pay someone. Yeah. Well, so
yeah, it's a little bit
more complicated than that, about
who pays for room, but
because right now it's Microsoft
that, you know, is this
shooting the codex. So it
goes into whatever Microsoft agreement
has with, with, with the
media owners. I mean, codec
owners, but I don't, I
don't actually know the details
of that, but you're right.
We could, we could make
it so that the first
time he installed one night,
as soon as he fell
one night, he also gets
the codex and, and you
know, right now it's right
now, it's either Dawn the
first time you do it,
or when you explicitly request
to get the codex. So
I, I've got a couple
of  machines around here,
but I'm not deeply familiar
with, with Linux as a
user. What is the experience
like? I mean, it's just
something that you have to
do. You have to jump
out to the command line
and SU this and that
and pseudo this in that
to get this installed or
Not at all. We actually,
we're actually very proud of,
of, of the solution we
came up. We came up
with, it's very similar to
the windows experience right now.
You know, we're recording this
and truly before we go
live. So the right now
you can see the experience,
but you will end up
on the backs of several
lights sites. It will detect
your browser based on your,
you know, when you get
these little lights that says,
you know, you're missing, Silverlight
click here to install. You
will click there. And when
you get to the Microsoft's
website, it will detect that
you're running a Linux system.
So it will forward you,
depending on the architecture that
you're using, it will send
those, it will send you
the directly to one of
our servers. And then a
little pop up, comes up
and just ask you the,
just ask you to install
it, that the, you agreed
to install this piece of
software that has been signed
by novella, then you say,
okay, and then that's it,
it downloads it. The only
difference that we, the only
difference with the, with the
Silverlight experiences, that we are
not able to, to restart
the browser ourselves. So we
need to, you know, it,
it will tell you the
plugging will lack the activist,
and as you restart the
browser, So how many architectures
and how many browsers we
use support? So at the
lunchtime, we're going to support
the exit is six and
actually six 64. And I
think, you know, if it
wasn't for, well, I think
it's gonna be really good
because, you know, we're coming
out with both, both of
the major architecture support is
from the get go, and
we're going to support Firefox
two and Firefox three, we
do have experimental bindings, but
they're not completed. We have
to complete them in the
future opera bindings. And WebKit
bindings in particular. WebKit because
it's becoming very popular on
Linux. So we will have
a support for the other
browsers, but right now there
is no major really, there's
no product, a productized version
of WebKit right now available
to the public. So, you
know, as soon as that
happens, we'll have a web
version as well, or multiple
web conversions. So we design
it kind of with a
little bridge that, you know,
the plugin is the shared
infrastructure is, is all the
same plugins. And then we
have little, little modules that
are different across browsers. The
plugin architecture on Linux is
pretty much same as is
it DP, API, or an
API rather We use the
MPA API for Mozilla. So
here's the thing. The problem
is that not every browser
uses the same API. So
the F the foundation level
for the most basic things,
everybody uses MP the Mozilla
and pea API. But the
problem is that Silverlight actually
takes advantage of a lot
more features in the browser.
Then the basic plugin API
provides, for example, Silverlight applications
are able to communicate with
the Dom, right? So you
can manipulate the Dom from
Silverlight right. Then make changes
to the Dahmer extract data
from the Dom. And it
gives it a very seamless
experience between the Dom and
the silver light application. So
you can, you know, the
distinction between what is Silverlight
and what is the browser
is, is blurred. But the
chief that the, you know,
you need to speak browser
specific KPIs in each one
of those. So in the
case of Mozilla, we speak,
we speak through these APA,
they call XP com. So
we have to speak with
Mozilla, with X speak, Tom,
but that obviously doesn't exist
in WebKit and doesn't exist
in Oprah. So we need
to use in the opera
case, the upright PIs that
would give them the same
integration and the same thing
goes for WebKit. Does this
get pretty complicated or do
you have a nice provider,
a abstraction to make that
not so hard? Yes, yes.
Yes. It's very nice. So,
you know, we're, I mean,
kind of we're looking forward
for the web kids wants
to come out and also
Microsoft has agreed. I mean,
you guys have agreed to
also publish a codex for
other architectures. So for example,
Linux and power PC and,
and, you know, Linux on
spark computer. So we can
distribute Moonlight and Monday, not
only for Linux machines, but
we also want to get
it on freebie as the
computers, when to get it
in Solara racing up in
Solera. So we kind of
went to see, we kind
of went to see Monday,
go into all of those
platforms that are not, you
know, that are not supported
directly by, you know, all
those unique says that are
not the most popular ones.
And it's relatively easy for
us to do that. We're
already getting some contributions from
the community to do that.
So, so, you know, we'll
be very happy to fill
in the void of all
those other platforms Now, from
the, from the point let's,
let's let me play devil's
advocate for a second, from
the point of view of
a Microsoft user, not, not
an employee, but just I'm
a guy who use windows.
Windows has like 90% share
and a Mac has, you
know, 9.9, 9% share, and,
and then Linux has everybody
else. And then when you
start talking about subgroups within
Linux, you know, Solaris, and,
you know, you must be
talking about fractions of a
percent of as far as
when you put it in
the entire bucket of all
the different computers out there
that are windows, is that
a lot of work to
support some of these more
obscure and hopefully obscure is
not an offensive word, but
these more obscure platforms? Well,
I think it's a really
good point. The, I think
that at the end of
the day, the shared idea
that we have with the
Microsoft guys right now is
we really like Silverlight as
a developer platform and we
want to make it available
everywhere. So, you know, we
don't want it to come
down to, I mean, if
the developer has to, at
some point it has to
come down as to, you
know, it has to run
on for lotteries. We wouldn't
want the fact that it's
not there to stop it.
Now, of course, I dispute
the claim that we're so
small to Linux fashion. I
think we're drawing and striving,
maybe another growing and striving
at like other ones, but,
you know, I think we're
growing, but so, but when
it comes to the actual
differences between Solaris and BSB
and Linux, they are, you
know, the DNAs almost exactly
the same. It's you, you
should probably think of it
in terms of what is
the difference between making a
freedom, working windows 2000 and,
and windows Vista, right? So
there's certain things that you
probably want to make a
little bit different if you
want to take advantage of
Vista and fall back gracefully
when you're running a windows
2000. So you think of
it the same way, because
the graphic system is the
same. It's always X, 11,
X, 11, the, you know,
the Unix facilities, the operating
system facilities are almost identical.
There's probably, you know, four
or five, if that's in
the source code that deal
with differences between those two.
And the third piece is
the kind of the hardest
part deport. And that's really
among like 2.0 issue. More
than that one, like 1.0
issue is porting the darkness,
the darkness, you know, the
core CLR to these operating
systems and those operating systems.
We already support. And I
agree they're probably not the
biggest or the largest operating
systems, but I think that
having, being able to say,
we're going to run on
all of those Unisys, regardless
of which one you have.
I think it's a really
useful, and kind of the,
the part that happens to
you is that we didn't
really have to do all
of the work ourselves. What
is really interesting about the
nature of open source here
is if someone really, really,
really needs it ancillaries or,
you know, specific variants of,
of BSB, you know, they
can always, they can always
do the work and we'll
be, you know, we'll be
happy to be Frank how
to build for them or,
and, and get the codecs
over to Microsoft so that
they can distribute those. Yeah.
It's pretty cool that you're
saying that they're gonna be
able to go up to
server lite.net and they're going
to get detected and be
a first class citizen like
everybody else. Have you found
anybody at Microsoft to be,
for lack of a better
word, evil? No. Well, you
know, the contract that I
have with Microsoft with the
Microsoft guys has been through
mono and through and through
silver light. And I think
that everybody that I've interacted
with at Microsoft, with everybody
I've interacted at everybody, I
talked to Mike about Moonlight
or silver light. They've been
always been great. And I
think that they share the
same passion that we do
for 'em for the technology.
You know, I absolutely love
working with, with all of
them. I think that, you
know, when people would talk
about evil, I mean, you
know, I don't think we're
playing Dungeons and dragons. And
I think that that's completely
blurs in the actual rational
discourse. Know it's not a
black and white world. There's
all of these, you know,
it's a, it's a gamma,
you know, it's a complete
spectrum. So yeah. You know,
I have never had a
problem with this. You know,
I happen to like Linux.
I happen to believe that,
you know, I want to
run an open source operating
system, but, but then if
somebody wants to run, windows
wants to run a Mac
or wants to run for
Larry's, you know, more power
to them. So, you know,
I kind of, don't like
to take that position, you
know, Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman with a word from
our sponsor. Do you know
how to build web 2.0
Ajax applications with web 1.0
components? You really can't. If
you want to do the
next generation web applications you'll
need next generation components. Just
like the ones that our
friends at Telerik have got
their rad controls for ESPN
at Ajax. It's a huge
pack of web controls built
on top of asp.net Ajax.
That'll add previously impossible performance
interactivity to your next project.
The new controls mirror, the
Ajax API from asp.net. So
development is really straightforward. The
client scripts are shared. So
loading time is not a
problem. If you just set
a couple of properties and
you'll be able to automatically
bind a web services for
a really efficient operation, the
new rad editor from ESPN
Ajax, Telerik loads up to
four times faster than before.
And the new rad grid
handles thousands of records and
just milliseconds, but as always,
it's best to try for
yourself. So you can visit
dot com slash ASP,
net Ajax, and download a
trial. Thanks a lot. Yeah,
it's interesting. A lot of
people, they feel very strongly
about one, you know, Microsoft
one way or the other.
And I've always said, one
of the reasons that I
came to work for Microsoft
a year ago was that
things are changing and that
the attitude towards open source
is, is dramatically changing it.
And I, I've always said
that the next couple of
years, we're going to see
big changes at Microsoft. We've
already seen them with, with
MVC. And I, I could
only imagine that those things
are going to get it
going to get even bigger.
I think that the interactions
that Microsoft has with, with
the Moonlight team and the
mano team is maybe not
as, as public and as
visible as some of the
other open source stuff we
do. And I don't know.
I wonder there was some
way to explain to people
how, how those interactions work.
I mean, do you just
call up a dev whenever
you need something and how
do they make sure that
they don't accidentally, you know,
taint you? They're always concerned.
We're always concerned about mano
people seeing something they're not
supposed to see, and then,
you know, you have to
be killed. Yeah. Yeah. Well,
I've worked now. So the
so kind of, it's been
a really organic relationship. It
kind of began, it kind
of began with, with Oz,
getting involved with eczema at
the time Microsoft was pushing
C-sharp and the.net VM through
the eczema standards process. And
she's what, we're a tiny
little startup. We actually were
invited by IBM as guests
to the meetings. And, you
know, you get this, you
started meeting people and you
start, you know, they become,
you know, you, you keep
a couple of email addresses
and whenever you have a
question, you drop them an
email. And so you'd be
gone kind of under a
very organic thing, just like
when you go to a
conference and you meet people,
it was the exact same
thing, just popping up and,
and, and talking to folks.
And, you know, over time
when we, when we decided
to work with Microsoft together
on this, you know, I
got a, I got a
bunch of more email addresses.
So Brian golf arcs, I
always, you know, I always,
I drop an email to
Brian and say, Hey, Brian,
we need help with this.
And he, he usually just
points us in the right
direction. So it's all you
need to talk to this
person, that person, and, you
know, it's, it's very organic.
I mean, it feels very,
I mean, at least our
collaboration with Microsoft feels very
open sourcey in that it's
the exact same process that
we follow with anyone else
in the community. Right. There's
really no different from our
standpoint. I think it's an
incredibly open source that way.
And, and it goes back
to what you're saying. I
think that not only, I
think that not only Microsoft
is changing, but you know,
the whole industry is, you
know, 10 years ago there
was none of this, right.
So everybody has to adapt
and change to, you know,
the internet being ubiquitous sounds,
being ubiquitous, you know, all
of these things. I think
that Microsoft is doing great,
that, you know, keeping up
with all of this stuff
that is happening. Yeah. Yeah.
I don't know how the
listeners would thought that this
interaction was going to be,
but I guess I somehow
imagined that you guys would
come to a table and
there'd be some, put some
tape on the table. And
the open source people would
stay on that side of
the table. It would be
very formal and there'd be
all sorts of lawyers and
people worrying about stuff. So
there are some, you know,
they gave us specifications and
they said, we have very
clear agreement. They gave us
specs and, and this is
a certification that must be
implemented. And the rest we
really do on our own,
the only piece that we
kind of been exposed to,
which is proprietary code is
a codex because we had
to do some work on
that. Other than that, you
know, I think we've maintained
a very clear separation between
Microsoft ideas and technology and
the way we implement ours.
So, so let me ask
you this, and this might
be a question for Joseph
who's been pretty quiet so
far is what is it?
What's in it for you
guys? I mean, why is
Novell going to so much
effort to make mano a
mano? I mean, where's the
money come from? Well, I
mean, I think, you know,
first and foremost, it's, I
mean, it's really about enriching
the desktop story for a,
I mean, we have, you
know, we have a desktop
Linux, you know, we're out
there promoting, and I'm not
having, you know, not having
access to Silverlight content on
our desktop is not a
very appealing proposition. So, I
mean, just from, just from
that standpoint, it's a, it's
a pretty compelling case to
say, Hey, we know we
can be the people that
are gonna, you know, that
are going to enable, you
know, not only for our
desktop, but, you know, for
all Linux desktop, you know,
beyond that, you know, it's,
well, I mean, that's, that's
pretty much the Nobel story,
but beyond that, I mean,
it's, it's very, it's very
interesting, you know, technically, and,
you know, as far as
the avenues that it opens
up for us for, you
know, an interesting way to
leverage mano and, you know,
interesting Avenue for the, you
know, for the joint work
that we do with Microsoft.
So, you know, I think
initially it just started building
out that desktop story, but
it opens up a lot
of pathways that weren't there,
you know, particularly before the
collaboration, are there any examples
of stuff where you've taken,
where when Novell, the larger
company has taken stuff out
of the team code, intellectual
property, whatever, and pushed it
into some other thing, or
where maybe, you know, someone
inside of Novell said, Oh,
I'm going to write that
in mano. And, you know,
wouldn't have done that. Had
you not been part of
the larger company? Yeah. I
mean, there are a number
of projects that we built
inside Novell that were all
based on Monarch. And I
don't think that had they
not acquired Simeon, they would
have done those projects and
Monarch. So I guess thinking
kind of a little bit
step back to why we're
building it, there were two
elements. One of them is
we really liked the technology
in terms of what Doug
net could do for developers.
And, you know, I started,
I always sell, which is,
I was kind of jealous
that the windows people were
getting this fantastic developer technology
and, you know, Linux was
lagging behind again. So we
wanted to bring up acknowledges
Linux. And, you know, on
the other hand, it allows
us to, it allows us
to run a lot of
very interesting code on Linux.
So not only you can
run applications, but you have
access to all of those
stuff. And the libraries that
exist out there that you
can build your software with.
So it can give you,
it gives you, it gives
you the, you know, the
possibility of moving your software
around and not the entirely
tied to windows. And it's
funny, some of the software
that we're building now is
for the first time, for
the first time we're transporting
the software was built for
Linux only and is going
into windows and the Mac.
And it's something that we
didn't plan on initially. I
mean, it would have been
nice, but we never thought
about that. And, and now
it's finally, you know, crossing
the trusting the, you know,
to the other side. And
in fact, there's a couple
of, you know, we work
with, with a company in
Denmark called unity and their
product is their product. Wasn't
entirely, you know, micro is
base with mana only my
course, it wouldn't even run
on Linux where it's just,
you know, a hundred percent
microwave. And, and thanks tomorrow,
they're going to start offering
their product, which I think
is a killer product. They're
going to start offering it
on a windows now. So
it's, it's an interesting, it's
an interesting situation where you
have a lot of good
mobility going back and forth.
Oh, now what's, what's the
future of that. I mean,
it seems like there's a
lot of speculation around unity
and everyone's talking to everyone,
seeing, you know, videos of
Mano on the iPhone. And
w are you thinking we're
going to get Silverlight on
the iPhone at some point,
is that the goal We
definitely want to kind of
the problem with the, with
the problem with the iPhone
is the easy Apple terms
of, of, you know, it's
really the license that Apple
gives you to develop applications
for the iPhone. And they've
basically stated both at the,
you know, at the legal
agreement that you signed with
them. And, you know, at
the kernel level, they disable
jet a jet engine. So
you can really adjusting time
compile code for that thing.
And you can really, and
they don't allow you to
use any interpreter, which is
not provided by them, which,
which is the reason why
you can have flash and
what you can have silver
light and what you can
have in a Python on
the iPhone. It's a, it
comes down to a, to
a legal issue and also
the kernel enforcing some of
those pieces. So one of
the things that we want
to do to be completely,
you know, within the, you
know, completely legit and completely
following Apple's requirements is do
aesthetic compilation of silver light.
Now the upside is you'll
be able to bring silver
light applications to the iPhone.
But downside though, is that
you is not going to
work inside the browser. It's
not something that you're going
to go to webpage and
it's going to work. The
only way that is going
to work is you're going
to have to build your
Silverlight app. And then, you
know, distributed through either the
Apple channel, you know, through
Apple's distribution challenge, the app
store, or you use the
enterprise deployment feature that allows
you to deploy your applications,
your own internal users, but,
but there's not, you know,
it's not going to integrate
into the web. You will
be able to build Silverlight
applications that they just want
to be inside a web
browser. So that is a
little bit of a, you
know, it's a little bit
sad that those restrictions are
in place, but on the
other hand, you know, if
you've built that sort of
light up, at least we
were going to be able
to bring it to, to
a phone and it will
be, you know, you were
going to get more of
a desktop experience with it
than a, than a web
experience. Can you speak a
little more about how they
are preventing this? I'm not
clear if these are guidelines,
like don't be naughty, or
if there's something that they've
actually physically changed to prevent
someone from doing what you're
saying to doing. Yeah. There
are two pieces, the tech
on the technical side, they,
you know, when you adjust
in time compile code, you
basically transformed the byte codes
that you get these, you
know, common, intermediate language codes,
and you translate them on
the flight to native, you
know, exit DCX or in
this case, arm, arm code.
And you're right. That stuff
into memory. Once you've compiled
the function, let's say the
function, you know, print test,
right. Once you've get some
pallet function print test, the,
the next step is you
need to turn that page
from writeable, right? That, that
chunk of memory that you
just wrote into, you need
to slip on a bed
that tells us if you
can execute the code on
this page. And the thing,
the tech, the technology that
just compilers use, what they
do is they write into
memory. And once they're done,
they fit this bit and
they let the CPU executes
build there. So in the
iPhone operating system, one point
now you were able to
do that with two point.
Now, starting with 2.0 2.1,
two point. Now they disabled
that feature. So you're not
physically able to implement the
jet engine. That means that
nothing like benign or Java
or.net can actually run using
just technology. So what we
do have, or we think
that is a kind of
a unique offering in mono
is we're able to do
a full static compilation of.net
code without having any just-in-time
compilation like Java or.net or
flash or . So I
think that that's, that's the
reason why we were, we
were going to be able
to do that, to do
that for, for silver light
on the iPhone. Now, the
other piece, the other piece
is a legal piece. And
they basically, the, the, the
Apple agreement is that you
will not run the, do
you agree that you will
not implement the interpreter or
implement the JIT compiler that
will let you execute arbitrary
code that has not been
approved by Apple. And I
don't know the reasons I
suspect that they want to
make sure that everything that
runs on the iPhone will
go to the app store
through the app store. And,
and I guess that if
you were able to basically
just shift flash or Silverlight,
then any apps can make
it to the iPhone. So,
you know, we can speculate
why Apple did that, but,
but those are the two,
the two restrictions, one is
legal, the other one is
technical. So the way that
you're getting around the jetting
part is you're basically, if
I understand correctly, you're doing
like an end gen of
the, of the code yourself.
Exactly. You think of Amgen
plus. So engine engine still
needs a tiny little bit
of, of, of runtime support.
And we can, and basically
what we did is we
took this extra step where
we completely, you know, we
completely Repub the jet engine.
There's not even a jet
engine running on the, on
Mon on the iPhone at
that point. Hmm. So do
you, do you anticipate, you
know, in six months or
a year, someone's gonna be
able to just fire up
an IDE and go file
new iPhone application and then
start writing away in C
sharp, maybe using Monat developer
eclipse. Yes. Yes. Well, so
today it's already possible. You
can do it today. I
mean, the unity guys have
basically done the entire work
for the pipeline. Now, the
they're focused on gaming. So
you really kind of, you
know, all the API that
you have accessible ours, you
know, Emma's core lit plus
gaming API, which, you know,
if you're a gamer, it's
perfect. If you're not, then,
then, then, then it's not.
But so unity already has
that on it's selling the
product right now. They've been
selling it for a month
now. So that, that does
exist today. But what we
want to do is, is
effectively, you know, make a
more interesting offering for the
iPhone. You know, at some
point we thought, well, what
about complex framework? And, you
know, bringing a compact framer
to the iPhone. And we
thought, and we didn't think
that, I mean, we think
that the future is silver
light, not really windows forms.
So I think what we're
going to go, what we
want to do eventually is
do a silver light. Basically
you build your Silverlight application
and we'll have a tool
that, you know, will transform
your zap file into a,
into a binary that you
can give up for distribution.
So you will continue to
visual studio you'll instead of
designing, you know, against that
huge canvas you'll designing is
the canvas that is, you
know, the size of the
phone, I dunno, 300 by
600 or 500. And then,
and then just convert the
zap into a, into a,
into a native application. Now,
when you've got both, if
you get both mano and
server light running on an
iPhone, is there a reason
for both? Or would you
just say, well, we'll just
know server light will be
our way. We'll do things.
I think silver should be
it. You know, we talked
about this because I think
that the iPhone is a,
is a, is a hot
gadget, but right now, you
know, we think, I mean,
all of our efforts are
really in silver lights. So,
so we had a couple
of options. One was build
native, you know, build native
API for, for the, for
the iPhone. But then, you
know, the testing becomes very
cumbersome. It will be a
macro, it's the only solution.
And, you know, it's a
lot of work and, you
know, we've built a bunch
of toolkits in the past.
You know, this is our
third or fourth tool kit
that we're building. So we
really don't want to go
down that path of doing
all of that work. It
seems like a lot of
work and it would also
be, you know, it would
be another API that developers
will have to learn it,
you know, we would be
limited in how, you know,
there would be no books,
there will be zero reference
materials. So it, I mean,
somebody might be able to
do that, but I think
that really the feature is
just to, just to build
it on silver lights, because
Silverlight is, well-documented, there's tons
of books, you know, you
can get help anywhere. You
can go to stack overflow
and, you know, a hundred
people will answer your questions.
So, I mean, there are
probably other ways of doing
things on the iPhone. I
just don't think they're very,
I mean, considering the size
of our team and considering,
you know, just the dynamics
of the market, I think
it would be better to
just say, we'll get you
silver light. And what we'll
probably do is we'll do
a template that makes the
application looks like an iPhone
application. Right. Right. And that
would, that would mean a
series of controls. And basically
you'd be doing owner draws,
AML that would look iPhone
ish and ultimately people would
be, it'd be pixel by
pixel. Perfect. But it wouldn't
really be the native APIs.
That's right. That's right. So
people will continue to use
Silverlight API and, you know,
we can, what we can
do is we can take
the Microsoft, you know, you
guys open source the controls
for, for silver light. So
what we have to do
is, you know, learn from
the source and kind of,
you know, build a nice
template that would look iPhone
ish and then ship it
on the iPhone. So that
way nobody would be able
to tell the difference between
the Gina Silverlight app and
the knife on nappy if
they don't want to. Right.
Right. Exactly. Now last question
is a, is Moonlight, does
it have, does it have
a reason to live on
windows or is it not
going to be a windows
thing? There's no reason to
have Moonlight on windows. If
you've got silver light on
windows already. Well, you know,
we said the same thing
about Mona. We thought we
should never bring it to
a, we will never bring
it to, to windows because
it's, you know, windows have.net,
but it turns out that
people actually use mono on
windows a lot, but maybe
when they will bring it
right in our focus is
really, really on Linux. But,
you know, it's open source
if somebody really cares and
has a, you know, a
reason or a business reason
to do it, I don't
know what that reason would
be today. But, you know,
that's kind of the, what
happens with this, you know,
incredibly democratize, you know, hacker
universe that we have these
days, you know, so many
people are doing so many
different things for God knows
what reasons. Yeah. You know,
when someone was commenting that
they really wanted to have
a tiny, tiny CLR for
windows that was like X
copy deployable. And, you know,
you could strip down mano
or use a Moonlight and
have a little portable application
that would have nothing. It
would have no install. You
just basically, you know, a
single statically linked app that
would be using mano as
it's, as its engine or
Moonlight as its engine. I
suppose you could do something
like that. That's actually what
the use cases today for,
for the windows case. And,
and it's been done mostly
by the gaming people, by
people that build games. So
it's funny, it's one of
those situations where people are
using Monarch and they're not
even bringing their apps to
Linux. You know, it's a
very windows centric, you know,
it's a windows app. They
just happen to embed a
tiny CLR for their gaming
there, you know, when they
shipped. So yeah. Maybe something
like that would happen with
one light. Yeah. So you're
saying I might be running
one of these right now
and have no idea that,
that model's on my machine
and running in a game.
Yeah. Well, the first, you
know, the first major game
that I know of, but
I can't say their name
in public is coming in
late February. Oh. But I'll
never know. Yeah. It's a
major game. So until late
February, I don't think you
have it right now. Or
if you go to a,
you know, if you're into
a, if you have kids,
you know, five to five
to eight, I think it's
a cartoon network is using
it now for a phone
call or some bomb or
fun ball or funds, something
like that. It's yeah. It's
one fusion fault. Fusion fault.
Yeah. So you get the
fusion full and you sign
up for fusion fall. It's
a massive multiplayer online gaming.
It's a little bit like
the world of Warcraft, but
for, you know, for young
kids for toddlers. Yeah. It's
exactly what we're Warcraft for
toddlers. Exactly. That's fantastic. Cool.
Well, Miguel and Joseph, thanks
so much for sitting down
to talk with me today
on the show. I know
that again, you're on vacation.
We go, so I'll let
you get back to the
beach or the mountains Or
wherever you are in Mexico.
Thank you very much. Cubby
was a pleasure. All right.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week.